- ## Yugoslav Wars
Due to the overlap and proximity of these conflicts, I've addressed them in a narrative format, quoting exclusively from Historians, legal scholars and independent investigations.

Kosovo War (1998–1999) Overview 

- With Tito's death in 1980, the relative calm that had pervaded Yugoslavia came to an abrupt end as ethnic and nationalist differences flared up yet again. Initially, Kosovar Albanians rioted in 1981 over poor living, economic, and educational conditions. Pristina University became a "hotbed of Albanian nationalism," and another mass exodus of Serbs and Montenegrins from Kosovo followed anti-Serb riots by the Albanian population. In response, Serbian anger continued to increase as Serbs now saw themselves as the aggrieved, disadvantaged party. By 1987, swelling Serbian resentment led to massive protest marches and rallies, paving the way for Slobodan Milosevic,106 who surged to power on a platform of radical Serb nationalism. Milosevic's first guarantee was that he would protect ethnic Serbs from abuse in Kosovo. He then had the Serbian government outlaw school instruction in the Albanian language. In 1989, he succeeded in completely stripping Kosovo of its autonomy108 and sent in the Serbian Army and Serbian police units to maintain order and discipline after rioting occurred in response to the constitutional amendments revoking Kosovo autonomy. From 1989 through late 1992, Milosevic effectively enforced a state of emergency in Kosovo, in which Serbian "security" forces suppressed Albanian media, language education, protests, and strikes.

  Kosovo and other Yugoslav republics evinced strong concerns over Milosevic's actions in short order. Albanian legislators met secretly in 1990, declared the Republic of Kosovo to be in existence, and created a "shadow" Kosovo government—the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK)—led by Dr. Ibrahim Rugova. In an effort to avoid being similarly swept up in Milosevic's centralization and nationalistic policies, first Slovenia, in 1990, and then Croatia, in 1991, declared independence from Yugoslavia. Milosevic responded by sending Yugoslav tanks into Slovenia. As a result, Yugoslavia effectively ceased to exist as of 27 June 1991. By 1992 the situation within the region had deteriorated drastically. The Communist world in the Soviet Union and eastern Europe had collapsed and the call for revolution continued to drift across southern Europe and the Yugoslav republics. Already in dire straits as the result of a massive debt and triple-digit inflation and heavily dependent on Western aid, the Yugoslav economy bordered on collapse with the advent of an international economic embargo in late 1991 against Serbia and Montenegro. Slovenia had already achieved independence, and the bloody slugfest within Croatia continued. Macedonia declared independence in January 1992, and Bosnia and Herzegovina followed suit in March 1992. However, this declaration of Bosnian independence from Yugoslavia led only to a violent struggle between the Bosnian Serbs, supported by Serbia, and the Bosnian Muslims. The Serbs sought to divide the country along ethnic lines and unite with a "Greater Serbia." In the midst of all of this, Serbia and Montenegro joined together to form the new Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) in April 1992, with Milosevic at the helm. On one side of the Bosnian conflict were the Bosnian Serbs, led by Premiere Radovan Karadzic and General Ratko Mladic, and the "Chetniks." They both had the support of Yugoslav National Army (JNA) units, and were intent on eradicating the Muslim population through terror tactics and a vicious ethnic cleansing program. Pitted against them were the Bosnian Muslims, who were merely attempting to hold on to as much territory as possible. To further complicate matters, however, the Bosnian Croats were also seeking to obtain Bosnian land for Croatia and were attacking Bosnian Muslims as well.

  During 1998, a full-fledged civil war opened up between Serbia and Kosovo. In the battles between Serb military and police forces and the KLA, thousands died and hundreds of thousands sought refuge elsewhere. Kosovo quickly became the foremost concern of the international community, posing grave humanitarian concerns and risking spillover into neighboring countries, which needed little to fan the existing embers of ethnic hatred and violence. A six-country "Contact Group" formed and initially called for negotiations on autonomy in place of armed conflict. Buttressed by internal support for his policies, Milosevic rejected the calls for Serbia to cease all military action in Kosovo. Instead, Milosevic sent more troops into Kosovo and escalated the level of fighting during the summer months of 1998. In response, the North Atlantic Council (NAC)130 asked NATO to explore and assess numerous military options to end the crisis in Kosovo.

 
  A January 2000 Report to Congress finds, "The Ushtria Clirimtare E Kosoves (UCK), or the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), was formed in the early 1990s with the goal of using force to create an independent Kosovo and, ultimately, a "Greater Albania* that would unite ethnic Albanians in Albania, Serbia, Macedonia, and Montenegro. A secretive organization with access to light infantry weapons and small amounts of explosives, the UCK in 1996 launched a guerrilla campaign of bombings and hit and-run attacks against Serb government facilities and personnel, as well as ethnic Albanians it suspected of collaboration with Serb authorities. The former UCK leadership continues to call for the independence of Kosovo. During the war, the leadership ceased public calls for a "Greater Albania." Beyond independence and economic reconstruction, the former UCK leadership has revealed little of its political platform. Further, neither the US, nor NATO, provided support to the KLA/UCK.

  UCK attacks had only a limited impact on Serb forces in Kosovo, and the group. remained a marginal force in the Kosovo Albanian autonomy movement. However, the deaths of 80 Kosovo Albanians, including many women and children, during a March 1998 raid by Serb security forces on a suspected UCK compound in central Kosovo galvanized support for armed resistance among ethnic Albanians in Kosovo and the diaspora. The UCK seized the leadership of the growing insurgency and expanded quickly in the following months-in part due to the ready availability of large numbers of weapons and military equipment looted from Albanian Army stores during the previous year and a willingness of Kosovo Albanians to volunteer for service. Despite its growing strength, the UCK was unable to counter the Yugoslav Army offensive that started in March 1999. UCK units attempted to defend villages and protect ethnic Albanian civilians throughout Kosovo, but were overwhelmed by the Serbs' superior firepower. The deployment of international military forces into Kosovo in June 1999, however, brought an end to the fighting. The UCK agreed to demilitarize and transform into the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), a non-military organization with civil defense duties, such as emergency rescue and disaster relief. KFOR officials in late August certified the UCK was compliant with the demilitarization requirements, and the UCK officially disbanded in late September 1999.

  The UCK leadership does not appear to have engaged in narcotics operations to support its activities during the war. Press reporting of various degrees of reliability indicates that some members of the former UCK are involved in narcotics smuggling, but we have no information on the scale of these activities. The UCK was not involved in terrorist activities-defined as premeditated, politically motivated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets. We do not have a definitive count of the number of noncombatant civilians killed by the UCK since its formation. The UCK primarily targeted Serb government personnel and facilities, as well as ethnic Albanians who were suspected of collaborating with Serb authorities. However, press reports suggest that some UCK members have been involved in intimidation attacks and retribution killings since Serb forces withdrew from the province in June 1999."

  In addition, Scholars have concluded, "all available evidence refutes the proposition aggressively advanced by the Milosevic regime that the KLA was mainly financed by drug and prostitution money."<sup>[[1]](https://www.press.uillinois.edu/books/?id=c033421)</sup></sup> <sup>[[2]](https://archive.org/details/report-on-kla)</sup></sup>

  Amid the unearthing of evidence of additional massacres and the continued rejection of peace overtures by Milosevic, the UN Security Council (UNSC) adopted Resolution (UNSCR) 1199 on 23 September 1998. The resolution called for an immediate cease-fire, an international presence, and the immediate withdrawal of Serbian troops from within Kosovo. Although the Serbs thereafter claimed to have complied, at least in part, the Contact Group observed no evidence of such compliance. Thus, while the Contact Group sent U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke and others to Belgrade to obtain Milosevic's assurances of future compliance with the terms of the resolution, on 13 October 1998 NATO authorized air strikes in the event that Milosevic ultimately failed to comply.

  The Serb massacre of forty-five Albanians in the village of Racak on 15 January 1999 forced the international community’s hand once again. NATO issued a "solemn warning" to both sides that it would resort to military force immediately if they did not again heed the terms of the cease fire. In an effort to settle the rising tension, the Contact Group announced a peace conference in Rambouillet, France, near Paris, on 6 February 1999. The warring parties received Western-drafted proposals on how to resolve the ongoing conflict and were "provided" a deadline by which they were to agree to the proposals. Although the Serbs initially expressed a willingness to discuss the proposal's terms, they reneged at subsequent meetings held in Paris in mid-March. As a result, the negotiations ended, the violence in Kosovo intensified, the KVM withdrew, and NATO once again threatened a strong military response. On 22 March, Holbrooke attempted a "last-ditch" effort to convince Milosevic to sign the agreement and prevent a military confrontation. The international community hoped to avoid air strikes but nonetheless continued to plan them. However, Holbrooke’s efforts were ultimately unsuccessful. On 24 March, NATO forces began a campaign of air strikes—code-named Operation Allied Force—against FRY military targets to force the Serbs to cease hostilities and allow ethnic Albanian refugees to return to their homes in Kosovo.

  Finally, on 3 June, Milosevic and the Serbian National Assembly accepted a peace plan that arose out of negotiations initiated by Russian Special Envoy Viktor Chernomyrdin. On 10 June, after having received confirmation from SACEUR that Serb forces were withdrawing from Kosovo pursuant to the terms of a NATO–FRY Military-Technical Agreement (MTA) dated 9 June, NATO officially halted the air strikes. Also on 10 June, the UNSC passed UNSCR 1244, which welcomed the FRY's acceptance of the "principles on a political solution to the Kosovo crisis" and demanded the FRY's "full cooperation in their rapid implementation." Although 10 June brought an end to the military campaign, significant events occurred during the two-plus months of NATO military action. One week after the start of the campaign, the crisis in the region escalated when on 31 March Serbs captured three U.S. soldiers patrolling the FRY-FYROM border. In April 1999 Serb troops were responsible for the massacre of atl east forty-seven Albanian men, and the forced departure of thousands more, from the town of Djakovica. In response, NATO intensified its campaign of air strikes, bombing roads, bridges, oil production facilities, and other significant targets in the FRY.

  On 27 May 1999 the UN International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) unsealed an indictment accusing Milosevic and four other senior Yugoslav officials of committing numerous war crimes in Kosovo. In passing UNSCR 1244, the UNSC formally declared its adoption of the general principles upon which the political solution to the Kosovo crisis would be based and announced its decision to deploy an international civil presence and an international security presence under UN auspices within Kosovo. The international civil presence was entitled the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),and the international security presence was known as KFOR. On 12 June, synchronized with the departure of the FRY forces, the initial elements of KFOR rolled into Kosovo. This almost 50,000-member international force was to assume the critical peacekeeping mission in Kosovo—code-named Operation Joint Guardian. The U.S. contribution to this force, "Task Force Falcon," operated within one of the five multinational brigades within Kosovo that comprised KFOR—the Multinational Brigade East (MNB(E)), located in southeast Kosovo, bordering the FYROM and the FRY. By 20 June 1999 a majority of the FRY forces had vacated Kosovo, KFOR was well established, and NATO had formally terminated the air campaign.

  Montenegro discussed separating from the FRY. Milosevic's popularity with many Serbs began to plummet over the loss of Kosovo. On 24 September 2000, elections were held in the FRY and opposition leader Vojislav Kostunica emerged as the victor. Milosevic refused to release the complete results, however, and instead demanded a runoff election against Kostunica. In response to Milosevic's refusal to step down, massive public protests and demonstrations took place within Serbia. A general strike was called, and over one million people flooded Belgrade, ultimately attacking the Parliament building. Serb security forces either joined the demonstrators or retreated. On 5 October 2000, Milosevic finally conceded the election and stepped down. His Socialist Party, still maintaining a degree of political power, agreed to share power with two opposition parties. Yet after thirteen cruel years and four more Balkan wars, Milosevic's reign had finally come to a close.<sup>[[3]](https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/llmlp/Lessons-Learned_Kosovo/Lessons-Learned_Kosovo.pdf)</sup></sup>

#### NATO targeting/ROE

- To quote at length from Tony Montgomery, Deputy Staff Judge Advocate and Chief, Operations Law at Headquarters EUCOM—on the targeting process:

  "Once the air campaign began, a daily list of proposed new targets (or targets that had been previously reviewed, but additional information had been obtained on) was provided to those working within the targeting group. All target nominations were maintained on a spreadsheet that was electronically updated and available for review on a classified website. I would review the information on the new targets using this list.
Early and unfettered access to data is critical for an effective and efficient target review. During Operation Allied Force, target data was stored on and accessed through our classified computer system. Those with access to the system had the ability to have most of the data on any individual target available for review with just a few keystrokes and mouse clicks. This information consisted of imagery, descriptions of the facility and its functions, analysis on impact (military advantage anticipated) if destroyed, possible collateral damage concerns, and historical information on the target. There, literally at my fingertips, was all the data needed to make a good initial legal evaluation of the target.
The results of the legal reviews were inputted into the targeting process using two primary methods. A spreadsheet format that was provided to those working within the targeting group and updated as new targets were proposed. This spreadsheet contained the target identification information, collateral damage concerns, justification for attack, and a law of war determination or recommendation. This method ensured a permanent record for each target reviewed and provided an easy means of recalling inputs on each target.

  The second method of input was through the collaborative targeting (CTT) sessions. These sessions were an outgrowth of Serbia's failure to acquiesce as quickly as some had hoped would happen. Continuing the conflict translated into a demand for more and better targets, and faster identification. Increasing the pace of target development meant, in part, more people devoted to the task. Throwing more people into the mix initially created additional problems. Groups worked and coordinated target products in a serial fashion. One group would forward its work as e-mail attachments, message traffic, fax, and or phone calls to others with responsibility for different portions of the process. The next group would make changes and forward (or, depending on the changes, return to the first group for reconsideration) to other groups involved in the process. This process continued until the lead group believed the proposed target was ready for decision-maker review. Decision-makers would receive an e-mail with the attached product information and would either accept the product information or send it back for further development.
The disadvantages of this early process were information overload, uncer-tainty, and duplication of effort. Using a serial workflow extended the process timeline and provided more opportunities for confusion, ambiguities and er-rors. There was no consensus among the participants on the rationale for attacking targets. While no illegal targets were attacked during this period, others and myself were concerned that as the tempo increased our ability to provide the necessary oversight would continue to degrade.

  The solution to this serial process was the development of the collaborative targeting sessions. The CTT sessions ensured all targeting organizations had a common understanding of objectives and guidance, built consensus, validated targeting assessments and integrated operational and legal concerns early into the targeting process. Using NetMeeting, a Microsoft product, on the classified internet system, the sessions "virtually" united representatives from commands throughout the theatre and the United States. Similar in concept and format to an internet "chat room" conducted over our classified computer sys-tem, these sessions brought all of the players into the same "virtual" room at the same time. All participants could see the proposed target on their computer monitor, could talk via headsets in real time to each other, and could ask questions and resolve issues. This format enabled everyone's input--in-cluding legal-to get to all those involved at the same time. With all the relevant functional experts gathered together, questions could be asked and resolutions made in minutes rather than days. What might have taken a week before could be done in one night's session. Collaborative targeting sessions were generally conducted every night.

  During a CTT session, the group reviewed proposed targets to determine whether they could be forwarded for approval. For each target, discussion revolved around three issues: 1) the linkage to military effects--the key to gaining legal approval, 2) the collateral damage estimate, and 3) the unintended civilian casualty estimate. The one aspect of this process that consumed most of the time was the collateral damage estimate. Whether it was the nature of the conflict, an outgrowth of the ever increasing visibility of the results of military actions, over sensitivity by political authorities, the desire to make a decision based on some objective "number" (no matter how unscientifically reached or misunderstood) rather than a subjective "value," or a combination of the above, the collateral damage estimate quickly became central to much of the targeting process. An integral part of this estimate was the Tier System. The Tier System was developed prior to Operation Allied Force as an effort to standardize the methodology to be used for estimating collateral damage. Though some aspects of this methodology are classified, the unclassified information provides a general understanding. The system currently has four tiers or levels. Each tier represents an ever-increasing level of analysis. Tier 1 consists of a 1500-foot circle drawn around the outer boundary of a proposed tar-get. If there is no collateral damage concern within that circle, then there is no need to move on to the next tier. Tier 2 involves applying fragmentation data of a specific munition to the actual target. This results in a smaller circle being drawn around the target. If a collateral damage concern still exists, then Tier 3 is used. This involves taking a specific munition, applying its record of accu-racy, along with the possibility of error, and determining the probable or possible extent of collateral damage. Finally, if the level of possible collateral damage is still viewed as unacceptable; and the target in question is deemed of sufficient value, then a Tier 4 analysis, involving computer simulation and modeling can be conducted.

  Here is an illustrative analogy: Tier 1 is like looking at an object with the naked eye, Tier 2 is like using a hand held magnifying glass, Tier 3 is like using a microscope, while Tier 4 is like using a high-powered electron microscope. The tier system is a useful tool that provides a methodology for evaluating the structural collateral damage and possible effects upon any human within the target area. However, it does not provide the actual number of injuries. Also,, just because a target is Tier 1 or Tier 4 does not tell the reviewer anything about the actual value of striking that target within the context of the ongoing campaign. Whether or not destroying a particular target is going to achieve the stated military or political objective is not a part of the tier system analysis. A target may have zero possibility of collateral damage, but if it also has zero impact on the campaign, then bombing that target is wasting resources, putting aircrews and civilians in danger, and possibly violating the law of war. Still, it is very tempting to point to the tier level of some target and make a value judgment solely on those criteria. Returning to the target approval process, once a collaborative targeting session approved a target, it was sent forward to the decision authority. Obtaining approval from both the appropriate authorities within the United States and NATO was required before any target could be attacked. (Note that as I was not involved in the NATO process, my discussions are focused exclusively on the US process.) Upon this final approval, the Joint Task Force (TF) could add the target to the master list and schedule it for attack. However, approval to strike meant much more than just satisfying the rather low thresholds set out by the law of war. The intense concern over the issue of collateral damage meant that targets were approved for strike only at a certain tier level. To achieve that level often meant that only a certain type of munition could be used or the target could only be attacked at certain times of the day. Thus, something as simple as a change in munition could raise the level of collateral damage above what had been approved and, thus, remove a target from the "approved for strike" category.

  As a result, though not listed as an official step in the targeting process, reviewing the daily list of proposed strikes for the next two days became a part of the process. This review was simply a quality check-not because people would intentionally ignore orders, but because people enter the data into the computers, people hit the wrong keys and people make mistakes. A single wrong entry or a miscommunication to the personnel who actually had to execute the mission could mean an attack occurring that had not been approved. This is not saying that a law of war violation would occur, just that a target would be struck in a manner that our civilian authorities had not authorized. In contrast to the hi-tech world of the collaborative targeting sessions, this review was a simple line-by-line comparison of the strike list to the approved target list and the legal review. Usually, this review found no discrepancies; however, on occasion targets listed as approved for attack had not yet been approved at the appropriate level or were being attacked with a munition that raised the possible collateral damage above that approved for the target. When such discrepancies were found, the target would be expedited through the approval process if possible, or the munition would be changed to bring the collateral damage estimate back down. Sometimes this necessitated canceling a strike. After this quality review, the proposed new list of targets would arrive and the process would begin for another day."<sup>[[4]](https://archive.org/details/legalethicalless78wall/mode/2up)</sup></sup>

#### Alleged NATO war crime examples

- A 2000 report, by the UNEP and IAEA experts, examined Depleted Uranium (DU) munitions use in the Balkans found: There was no detectable, widespread contamination of the ground surface by depleted uranium. This means that any widespread contamination is present in such low levels that it cannot be detected or differentiated from the natural uranium concentration found in rocks and soil. The corresponding radiological and toxicological risks are insignificant and even non-existent.

  Detectable ground surface contamination by DU is limited to areas within a few metres of penetrators and localised points of concentrated contamination (‘contamination points’) caused by penetrator impacts. A number of contamination points were identified by the mission but most of these were found to be only slightly contaminated. The majority of the radioactivity was attached to the surrounding asphalt, concrete or soil, with some attached to the loose sand present in some penetrator holes. In many cases, the radioactivity was so low that it was hardly detectable."

  There is no significant risk related to these contamination points in terms of possible contamination of air, water or plants. The only risk of any significance would be that someone touched the contamination point, thereby contaminating their hands (with a risk of subsequent transfer to the mouth), or directly ingested the contaminated soil. However, with reasonable assumptions on intake of soil, the corresponding radiological risk would be insignificant, while from a toxicological point of view, the possible intake might be somewhat higher than the applicable health standards." No DU-contaminated water, milk, objects, or buildings were found."<sup>[[5]](https://www.iaea.org/sites/default/files/finalreport.pdf)</sup></sup>

- On May 7, 1999, during the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia, it was alleged that the US deliberately targeted the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade. This was not the case. In summary, there were several crucial errors which led to the Chinese Embassy being struck: There was an error in locating the target. The approach used to attempt to locate the FDSP building was severely flawed. All sources of information used to prevent precisely this type of accident were either inaccurate or incomplete. The review process did not catch the locational error and did not consult any material or any person which could have provided correct information. There was in the immediate aftermath of the bombing some confusion as to what had happened and some of our early public statements were confused and contradictory. To summarize clearly and precisely: the attack on the PRC Embassy was the result of a series of errors that led to the destruction of the PRC Embassy instead of the Serb military target that was intended. The use of a map containing an error--the inaccurate location of the Chinese Embassy--contributed to the tragic mistake--but this was not due solely to a "map error." What went wrong was, first and foremost, that the approach used to locate the Bulevar Umetnosti 2, the address of the FDSP, was severely flawed. Second, the databases used to check and prevent this type of targeting error were also inaccurate, incomplete, and not fully independent. And third, the target review process did not detect the first two mistakes, nor did it involve people and information that could have provided additional data to correct or detect these errors.<sup>[[6]](https://1997-2001.state.gov/policy_remarks/1999/990617_pickering_emb.html)</sup></sup> <sup>[[7]](https://www.cia.gov/readingroom/docs/DOC_0001081870.pdf)</sup></sup> <sup>[[8]](https://irp.fas.org/congress/1999_hr/990722-hamre.htm)</sup></sup> ICTY agreed with these findings, and found no war crime had occurred. ICTY examined a number of high-profile incidents:

  - Grdelica train bombing is not a war crime. Per the independent findings of ICTY, "62. It is the opinion of the committee that the bridge was a legitimate military objective. The passenger train was not deliberately targeted. The person controlling the bombs, pilot or WSO, targeted the bridge and, over a very short period of time, failed to recognize the arrival of the train while the first bomb was in flight. The train was on the bridge when the bridge was targeted a second time and the bridge length has been estimated at 50 meters (Wenz study para 6 g above at p.25). It is the opinion of the committee that the information in relation to the attack with the first bomb does not provide a sufficient basis to initiate an investigation. The committee has divided views concerning the attack with the second bomb in relation to whether there was an element of recklessness in the conduct of the pilot or WSO. Despite this, the committee is in agreement that, based on the criteria for initiating an investigation (see para. 5 above), this incident should not be investigated. In relation to whether there is information warranting consideration of command responsibility, the committee is of the view that there is no information from which to conclude that an investigation is necessary into the criminal responsibility of persons higher in the chain of command."

  - The Attack on the Djakovica Convoy on 14/4/99, ICTY finds, "It is the opinion of the committee that civilians were not deliberately attacked in this incident. While there is nothing unlawful about operating at a height above Yugoslav air defences, it is difficult for any aircrew operating an aircraft flying at several hundred miles an hour and at a substantial height to distinguish between military and civilian vehicles in a convoy. In this case, most of the attacking aircraft were F16s with a crew of one person to fly the aircraft and identify the target. As soon as the crews of the attacking aircraft became aware of the presence of civilians, the attack ceased."

  - Further, "NATO intentionally bombed the Radio and TV station and the persons killed or injured were civilians. The questions are: was the station a legitimate military objective and; if it was, were the civilian casualties disproportionate to the military advantage gained by the attack? For the station to be a military objective within the definition in Article 52 of Protocol I: a) its nature, purpose or use must make an effective contribution to military action and b) its total or partial destruction must offer a definite military advantage in the circumstances ruling at the time. The 1956 ICRC list of military objectives, drafted before the Additional Protocols, included the installations of broadcasting and television stations of fundamental military importance as military objectives (para. 39 above). The list prepared by Major General Rogers included broadcasting and television stations if they meet the military objective criteria (para. 38 above). As indicated in paras. 72 and 73 above, the attack appears to have been justified by NATO as part of a more general attack aimed at disrupting the FRY Command, Control and Communications network, the nerve centre and apparatus that keeps Milosević in power, and also as an attempt to dismantle the FRY propaganda machinery. Insofar as the attack actually was aimed at disrupting the communications network, it was legally acceptable."<sup>[[9]](https://www.icty.org/en/press/final-report-prosecutor-committee-established-review-nato-bombing-campaign-against-federal)</sup></sup>

### Bosnian War (1992–1995)

#### 1991-1992: War Erupts and the international reaction:

- In June 1991, simmering ethnic tensions within the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia came to a peak after the legislatures of Slovenia and Croatia voted overwhelmingly to declare their independence. As an immediate response to their secessions, the Yugoslav government issued a statement claiming such declarations to be "illegal" and "illegitimate" and ordered its military to secure their borders. Two days later, the national Yugoslav People's Army ("JNA"), whose Commander and a majority of whose soldiers were Serbian, responded with force and invaded Slovenia to prevent its separation, but the JNA was met with strong resistance. In Croatia, fighting erupted between Croatian security forces and minority Serb irregulars, who had the backing of the JNA. The Croatian forces quickly lost an estimated one- third of the country to the Serb insurgents. Each of the warring factions, the Serbs, Bosnian Serbs and later the Bosnian Croats, declared regions of territory as "ethnically pure, autonomous" areas under their control, and fiercely fought to protect and expand their holdings.

  In response to the civil unrest in Yugoslavia, the European Community ("EC") convened an emergency meeting of the Conference for Security and Cooperation in Europe ("CSCE"). The CSCE urged the warring factions to accept a cease-fire and sent observers to Yugoslavia to monitor their compliance and troop movement. However, throughout the summer of 1991, while cease-fires were negotiated, signed, and violated, the JNA continued to launch military offensives in Croatia.

  In its third meeting on this subject, the CSCE passed a resolution calling for the imposition of an aims embargo against all parties to the conflict. On September 25, 1991, the Bush Administration, on behalf of the United States, supported the passage of United Nations Security Council Resolution 713 ("UNSC Res. 713"). The resolution imposed a complete embargo on all weapons and equipment deliveries to the former Yugoslavia—including Bosnia, Croatia and Serbia. Shortly thereafter, the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 724, to establish a Sanctions Committee that would monitor compliance with the embargo. Resolution 713, in concert with United National Security Council Resolutions 740 and 787 which addressed the implementation of the embargo, called on all nations to abide by the embargo, but did not legally require countries to enforce the embargo.

  The United Nations arms embargo was intended to contain the war and prevent the entry of additional countries into the conflict. One of the consequences of the embargo, however, was the preservation of Serbian military superiority over the other republics due to the Serbs' alliance with the JNA and the extensive supply of equipment and munitions within the JNA arsenal. Throughout 1991, the JNA continued to attack various Croatian cities. In Zagreb, governmental buildings, including President Tudjman's office, were shelled. In the coastal town of Dubrovnik, the JNA cut off the power and water supplies, and severed telephone links for weeks at a time. In November, the Serbian forces finally left Vukovar, a city of 45,000, in ruins after months of fighting. The first United Nations-sponsored cease-fire went into effect on November 23, 1991 but quickly collapsed, as intense fighting continued elsewhere in Croatia. In January, 1992 the first European Community casualties were reported. Five military observers sent by the CSCE were shot down in their marked helicopter. From this moment, it was evident that a larger international presence was needed to maintain peace in the region. Shortly thereafter, the United Nations sent a team to Croatia to lay the groundwork for the deployment of international peacekeeping troops. With United States support, the passage of United Nations Resolution 743 authorized the establishment of the 14,000-strong United Nations Protection Force ("UNPROFOR") for an initial service of twelve months. The troops were composed of platoons from many nations including Great Britain, France, Canada, Egypt, Malaysia and the Russian Federation and were dispatched throughout the region in areas of heavy fighting and relative calm.

  On 9 October 1992, UN Security Council passed resolution 781, which prohibited unauthorized military flights in Bosnian airspace. This led to Operation Sky Monitor, where NATO monitored violations of the no-fly zone, but it did not take action against violators of the resolution. In response to over 500 documented violations, the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 816, which authorized states to use measures "to ensure compliance" with the no-fly zone over Bosnia. NATO's Operation Deny Flight, which lasted from April 12, 1993 to Dec 20, 1995, enforced this UNSCR compliance.<sup>[[10]](https://www.afhistory.af.mil/FAQs/Fact-Sheets/Article/459001/operation-deny-flight/)</sup></sup>

#### Conclusion on aid allegations

  Several investigations were conducted to examine the charges. In total, millions of classified records were examined, many hundreds of individuals interviewed and cross-examined. The following are the core conclusions of these independent & authoritative studies. Above are, are specific areas of concern, to clarify the confusing record left in the wake of sensationalist headlines and conspiracy theories:

- "From the outset of the Clinton Administration, it was United Slates policy neither to oppose nor support third party arms transfers to Bosnia-Herzegovina. This policy was embodied In the "no instructions" response to the Croatian Government's question on the United States view on the transshipment of arms. It served several important United States interests, and helped establish conditions on the ground that pointed the way to peace. The United States took no action to aid arms transfers to the former Yugoslavia. At no time did any United States government official take any action to supply arms to any country or entity covered by the U.N. arms embargo. At no time did any United States government official undertake any covert action to supply arms to any country or entity covered by the embargo, or to encourage, aid or assist in the shipment or transfer of arms to any country in the former Yugoslavia. No United States Government official coordinated, cooperated, conspired with or suggested to the Bosnian Muslims, the Government of Croatia, or the Bosnian Croats that the United States be asked to state its view of the transshipment of arms. United States Government officials directed Ambassador to Croatia Peter Galbraith to respond that he had "no instructions" when asked for the reaction of the United States government to the transshipment of arms through Croatia to Bosnia by the government of Croatia. Ambassador Galbraith carried out his directions correctly and promptly. There was no "greenlight" for Iran.<sup>[[13]](https://archive.org/details/bosnia-arms)</sup></sup> 

- "The Committee found no evidence that the United States ever provided such support or any quid pro quo to Croatia, or encouraged any country to provide arms or military assistance in violation of the arms embargo, despite the fact that on September 27, 1994, Bosnia did publicly call for a United Nations resolution lifting the arms embargo that would incorporate a six-month delay."<sup>[[14]](https://archive.org/details/united-states-actions-regarding-iranian)</sup></sup>

- "Based on the facts developed during the Committee's inquiry into the matter of the shipment of Iranian arms into Bosnia, we believe that the following conclusions are inescapable: (1) the United States government undertook no covert action to ship weapons to Bosnia or Croatia; (2) No U.S. official directed, controlled or facilitated the shipment of Iranian arms to Bosnia or Croatia; (3) No U.S. official violated U.S. law relating to covert action, intelligence activities, or notifications to Congress; (4) No discrepancies justifying a criminal investigation exist in the testimony of the witnesses who appeared before the Committee; and (5) Nothing in the Committee's inquiry contradicts the findings of the 1995 and 1996 investigations of the President's Intelligence Oversight Board."<sup>[[15]](https://archive.org/details/investigation-into-iranian-arms-shipment)</sup></sup>
