















## Human research, 1932-1990
A number of myths persist to this day, on a wide-range of Federal, State, and local government activities in human research, from WW2, to the Cold War—this is due to highly inaccurate, sensationalist headlines. Ranging from Biological, Chemical and radiation research—through the Military, CIA, and civilian institutions. Overall, the scientific consensus has been that all these experiments have been safe, in the short and long-term. Informed consent was provided in the vast majority of cases, with only a few unknowns. Nor was research conducted haphazardly, or with little regard for safety or ethics.

#### US Military 
##### BW
Between 1941 and 1969, when President Nixon banned Biological Weapons (BW), the US Army conducted a series of investigations into the defense against BW, and limited use of BW in retaliation. Open-air tests were not human research experiments, contrary to sensationalist speculation, and Soviet disinfo.

- Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson requested the National Academy of Sciences to appoint a committee to make a complete survey of the BW situation (two months prior to the attack on Pearl Harbor). After careful study, the committee concluded in February 1942 that BW was feasible and urged that appropriate steps be taken to reduce U.S. vulnerability to BW attack. Secretary Stimson then recommended to President Roosevelt the establishment of a civilian agency for this purpose. With approval by the President, the War Reserve Service (WRS) was formed in August of 1942. Scientific advice was received from a committee of prominent scientists set up by the National Academy of Sciences and the National Research Council. The first task undertaken by WRS was the development of defensive measures against possible BW attack. Its major achievement was the organization of a research and development program (R&D now referred to in the Department of Defense as research, development, test and evaluation, (RDTE) to extend the paucity of knowledge about BW. It was concluded that significant knowledge could not be gotten without larger scale developmental operations. Therefore, in November 1942, WRS requested the Chemical Warfare Service (CWS) of the Army (redesignated the Chemical Corps in 1946) to prepare to assume responsibility for a larger scale research and development program, including construction and operation of laboratories and pilot plants. 

  The Office of Strategic Services alerted the Joint Chiefs of Staff in December 1943 to indications that the Germans might be planning to use BW. The BW program was accordingly stepped up and, in June 1944, the complete program was transferred by direction of the President to the War Department. At the direction of the Secretary of War, the Chemical Warfare Service was made responsible for work on BW agents, for BW intelligence, and for BW defense. The Army Surgeon General was directed to cooperate with the CWS on matters of BW defense. The program continued as a joint effort with Navy and other Federal department participation. The R&D program was greatly accelerated with the addition of field testing facilities and a production plant. When the War Department assumed full responsibility, Secretary Stimson appointed Mr. Merck as a special consultant on BW. He also established the United States BW Committee in October 1944 wich Mr. Merck as Chairman and with senior representatives from the military services. During World War II, the policy of BW use implicity paralleled the policy for Chemical Warfare (CW); that is, retaliation only. While the United States had not ratified the Geneva Gas Protocol of 1925 which prohibited CW and BW, President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill announced this policy in unilateral statements in the spring of 1942. By the end of World War II, a wide variety of disease agents effective against man, animals, and plants had been studied and limited field testing conducted. Extensive work on safety measures to perform BW research and development had been necessary as no comprehensive procedures, methodologies or equipment had been available at the start. Even so, infections occurred. These were later reported publicly in the extensive War Department press release on BW in January 1946. The release was the first notification to the nation and the world of United States work in BW. It reported, in part, that:  "In all work on biological warfare carried on in the United States, extreme care was taken to protect the participating personnel from infection. Many new techniques were devised to prevent infection and proved highly successful. Hospitals and dispensaries were maintained at all installations, staffed with both Army and Navy personnel and were equipped to treat accidental infections. As the result of the extraordinary precautions taken, there occurred only sixty cases of proven infection caused by accidental exposure to virulent biological warfare agents which required treatment. Fifty-two of these recovered completely; of the eight cases remaining, all are recovering satisfactorily. There were, in addition to the sixty proven cases, 159 accidental exposures to agents of unknown concentrations. All but one of these received prompt treatment and did not develop any infection. In one instance, the individual did not report exposure, developed the disease, but recovered after treatment."

  In response to concerns about the vulnerability of the United States to covert attack, the Research and Development Board, OSD, requested its Committee on BW to consider the implications of BW in sabotage in extension of a study by a Special "Ad Hoc Panel on Sabotage." In October 1948, the Committee submitted a "Report on Special BW Operations" concluding that: BW was well adapted to subversive use; U.S. was particularly susceptible to attack by BW operations which presented a grave danger, and the current BW R&D program did not meet the requirements to defend against subversive BW operations. The Committee provided a blueprint on goals, objectives, organization, and examples of projects. One of their defensive project examples was conduct of vulnerability tests on "...test ventilating systems, subway systems, and water supply systems with innocuous organisms..." Their recommendations were subsequently approved and became the genesis of open air vulnerability tests and covert R&D programs conducted by the Army, some of which were in support of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). As a result of the study recommendation a Special Operations (SO) Division was established at Camp Detrick, MD in May 1949. At the end of World War II, all the field test sites with the exception of Dugway Proving Ground, were abandoned and the primitive Granite Peak BW test site at Dugway Proving Ground, Utah was inactivated. Pathogenic agent testing at Camp Detrick was confined to closed laboratory size chambers and was directly related to agent evaluation and medical defensive aspects. In this period, no control experimentation on humans had yet been conducted at Camp Detrick even though such experimentation was an acceptable practice in the development of vaccines within the U.S. medical community.

  Small scale outdoor testing with two biological simulants (BG, a spore forming microorganism; Serratia marcescens, a vegetative organism commonly referred to as SM) and inert material such as talc, were conducted at Camp Detrick. These materials were considered to be totally harmless by scientific and medical experts. In 1949, construction of an enclosed one million liter test sphere (the largest in the world) was built at Fort Detrick and BW explosive munition tests with pathogens were started. The first open air sea tests with biological simulants were conducted in 1950 aboard U.S. naval ships in the Atlantic Ocean off Norfolk, VA. Simulant clouds were released to envelop ships so as to assess their vulnerability and to test prototype BW electronic detection devices. These same stimulants were released in open-air tests in San Francisco, Panama City, Key West, New York subway, Washington, D.C. Pennsylvania, Edgewood Arsenal in Maryland, Port Hueneme, USS Coral, and San Clemente. These occurred under various project/operation names, such as LAC, top hat, SHAD, project 112, whitecoat, Sea-Spray, Dew, D-22 program, etc.<sup>[[1]](https://archive.org/details/us-army-bw-activity)</sup></sup>

  "Operation Whitecoat" was the code name for the plan to use human volunteers in field experiments concerning the effects of certain biological pathogens upon humans. Thorough legal investigation and ethical review yielded a group of conditions under which volunteers could be used in research: Voluntary consent is required. Written consent must be witnessed, and signed by the individual concerned. No experimentation which could predictably lead to death or permanent disabling injury will be investigated with the use of human volunteers. Proper medical supervision and treatment capability will be immediately available to the subjects. Experimentation must be expected to yield fruitful results for the good of society, not available by other means. Experimentation should avoid all unnecessary physical and mental suffering. The degree of risk taken should never exceed the importance of the experiment or the expectable benefits from it. The volunteer may remove himself from the experiment at any stage if he feels that he has reached the limits of his physical or mental endurance. The above elements were incorporated in the policies and procedures for the use of human volunteers in biological warfare research published by the Army Chief of Staff (CS 385-30, June 1952). Assignment to Fort Detrick did not mean that the volunteer automatically participated in human experimentation. There was a distinct process used for each experiment. Each medical investigator prepared a protocol that was extensively reviewed and modified to comply with the twelve ethical principles of the Nuremberg Code. (The Nuremberg war crimes trials convicted 23 Nazi doctors of murder). In 1946, Andrew Ivey released his list of ten conditions required for "permissible medical experiments" in healthy subjects, which became known as the Nuremberg Code. These twelve conditions are embodied in the Wilson Memorandum described above.) When a review validated the ethical requirement and scientific validity of an experiment, it was forwarded to Army officials for approval. It was at this point that potential volunteers were briefed as a group on the approved protocol. During this briefing, they became familiar with the purpose of the study and the risks and benefits involved. They also attended an interview with a scientist where they could ask questions about the research. Volunteers were encouraged to discuss the study with family members, clergy and personal physicians. After an obligatory waiting period of 24 hours to four weeks (the length depended on the presumed risks of the study), informed consent documents would be signed. It must be stressed that Operation Whitecoat soldiers were not required to participate in any study, only to be present for the protocol briefings by principal investigators seeking volunteers. About 20 percent of Operation Whitecoat volunteers did not participate in any study during their tenure at Fort Detrick.<sup>[[2]](https://health.mil/Reference-Center/Frequently-Asked-Questions/Human-Subject-Research-at-Fort-Detrick)</sup></sup>

  Several news papers claimed there had been death or serious illness in San Francisco, even a study claimed there might have been a link at a SF and Stanford hospitals. However, close scrutiny of that paper shows serious flaws. Indeed, a seperate review by a group of eminent scientists to review the available information and provide recommendations on the future use of SM. The four reviewers were from CDC, USPHS; Department of Health, City of New York, Ohio State University; and Microbiological Institutes, National Institutes of Health, USPHS. "The data in the referenced article describing the experience in San Francisco are incomplete as to the primary relation of the SM isolated from the patients and their illnesses, except in the case of one patient who died from bacterial endocarditis and SM bacteremia. With this single exception, the finding of SM in these cases was not shown to have influenced the clinical course of the patients' illnesses." 

  Health data for Monroe County (Key West) and Bay County (Panama City) do not support the Newsday allegations of pneumonia cases according to Dr. C. Prather, Florida's Health Officer, as given to the National Observer Weekend Edition (26 December 1976). A state-wide influenza epidemic hit Florida in 1952 and 1953 with a corresponding increase in pneumonia. According to Dr. Prather, the incidence of pneumonia in Bay County (Panama City) was relatively constant in 1951, 1952, and 1953. Additionally, SM has been used medically as a bacterial tracer from 1937 to 1969 with the results having been published in highly reputable medical journals as late as February 1969. Dr. David J. Sencer, Assistant Surgeon General, Center for Division Control in Atlanta GA provides additional data regarding the incidence of pneumonia and influenza deaths near cities where the vulnerability tests were conducted. The report substantiates the lack of evidence associating the reported deaths with the organisms used in the various tests.<sup>[[3]](https://archive.org/details/us-army-bw-activity/page/141/mode/2up)</sup></sup>

##### CW
- Chemical releases, (Fluorescent particles, ZnCdS), in the public domain, such as St Louis, Minneapolis. Despite claims made by Lisa Martino-Taylor in her dissertation—a critical examination of declassified documents she cites, reveals no evidence of a hidden program of radioactive tests in St. Louis and Minneapolis. Nor do they reveal any coverup or secrecy or "poisoned" residents, between 1953 and 1965. To quote from the material she references, "Meetings were held with various city officials of St. Louis for the purpose of completing arrangements for wiresonde and field-test operations. Minor difficulties with the Park Commissioner were ironed out with the completion of the change in city administration. The St. Louis police department was quite cooperative at all times, and the fire department aided in the recovery of a kytoon and thermistor which had become entangled in a tree during gusty winds. Civil Defence and city officials of Winnipeg and surrounding municipalities were exceptionally cooperative in helping to initiate mesometeorological operations in that city. As a result, considerable interest was shown by the press and the public. Nor did these studies target minorities. Indeed, the opposite is true, "Those residents in the How Area contacted for location of sampling equipment in homes were found to be extremely cooperative."<sup>[[4]](https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/AD0031508.pdf)</sup></sup> <sup>[[5]](https://archive.org/details/Aerosol-study)</sup></sup> <sup>[[6]](https://archive.org/details/st-louis-dispersion-study)</sup></sup> The aerosols that were released were all safe. The US Army Center for Health Promotion and Preventative Medicine conducted health risk assessments of these Cold War era tests in 1994 following the declassification of the test reports. These health risk assessments used guidance from the EPA and focused on determining the health effects from inhalation exposure to the ZnCdS, which was used to simulate potential Soviet deployed biological agents from that era. These health risk assessments determined that exposure to ZnCds from the testing would not cause a health risk to those exposed. The National Research Council Committee on Toxicology, a private nonprofit institution, conducted an independent review of the health risk assessments. In their report, Completed in 1997, the NRC agreed with the Army's conclusion that ZnCdS exposures would not cause a health risk, finding, "tests did not expose residents of the United States and Canada to chemical levels considered harmful."<sup>[[7]](https://nap.nationalacademies.org/catalog/5739/toxicologic-assessment-of-the-armys-zinc-cadmium-sulfide-dispersion-tests)</sup></sup> In addition, they recommended that the Army conduct a subsequent toxicological study to determine the effects of ZnCds when it broke down in the body.

  The U.S. Army followed the National Research Council's recommendations and completed a toxicological study in 1998. The toxicological study found that more than 40% of the ZnCdS was cleared from the test subjects within the first day, only a very small amount was found after one week, and the remaining amount was negligible after 14 weeks following exposure. Additionally, it found evidence that ZnCdS does not likely break down into Cadmium in the body. While a single very high concentration could elicit an inflammatory response in the lungs that diminished with time, this dosage was 8,409 times the amount that was used in the Army ZnCdS dispersion testing. This study was peer reviewed and published in Inhalation Toxicology, Volume 12 in 2000.

  The National Academy of Sciences, Institute of Medicine conducted an independent review of the toxicity study in 2004 and corroborated the conclusions presented in the National Research Council assessment and the U.S. Army Center for Health Promotion and Preventive Medicine toxicological study. The U.S. Army Public Health Command has reviewed the health risk assessments as well as available source documents from the NRC's Committee on Toxicology and the Institute of Medicine. The U.S. Army Public Health Command reconfirms that exposure to ZCdS, under the test conditions reported, would not cause a health risk in humans. Further, these reports contain no evidence of a radioactive component to the ZnCdS dispersion testing as has been alleged in the media.<sup>[[8]](https://web.archive.org/web/20121109112920/http://www.blunt.senate.gov/public/_cache/files/430b5197-ca1d-4b06-bcc5-c8d7f9d7cf92/Response%20from%20Army.pdf)</sup></sup>
  
  Indeed, several independent studies were conducted by the UK's Academy of Medical Sciences, and others, finding that ZnCdS, CdS and Cd is also safe—as these were also used by the MoD's dispersion tests, (Dorset Biological Warfare Experiments, also known as DICE trials) "With regard to the land-based trials it is concluded that the dissemination of ZnCdS by the UK during the ‘Cold War’ did not significantly add to the cadmium concentrations in soil, except within a few metres of the point of dissemination of the material. Except immediately around the dispersal sites in two trials at RAF Beaulieu airfield, the predicted soil concentrations are within the range of cadmium concentrations normally observed in the UK and much lower than those found at Shipham. Risk to the public from soil contamination with cadmium from these and other ZnCdS dispersion trials is therefore considered to be negligible. With regard to the long-range contamination trials, the dose potentially received by inhalation during even the most severe case was small (c. 0.13 μg Cd). Over all the trials, our worst case estimate of personal dose received from these trials is c. 10 μg over an eight year period. This is the amount of cadmium that is inhaled in a normal urban environment in a period of between 12 and 100 days (or from smoking a total of 100 cigarettes). We are also reassured by the fact that no increased incidence has been claimed for the diseases that are particularly associated with cadmium toxicity. We were further reassured by discovering that the people largely involved in the dissemination of the cadmium sulphide from aircraft who will have been exposed to very much larger amounts than anybody on the ground suffered no ill effects. Our conclusions therefore do mirror those in the much more comprehensive American study."<sup>[[9]](https://acmedsci.ac.uk/file-download/34958-ZincCadm.pdf)</sup></sup> <sup>[[10]](https://oem.bmj.com/content/59/1/13)</sup></sup> <sup>[[11]](https://archive.org/details/uk-bw-defence-field-trials-1940-1979)</sup></sup>
  
- Volunteers. The preliminary Laboratory research was absolutely necessary in order to insure compliance with the basic policy governing the use of humans in research, Chief of Staff Memorandum 385, which provided: "The experiment should be such as to yield fruitful results for the good of society, unprocurable by other methods or means of study, and not random and unnecessary in nature. The number of volunteers wed shall be kept at a minimum. The experiment should be so designed and based on the results of animal experiments and a knowledge of the natural history of the disease or other problem under study that the anticipated research will justify the performance of the experiment. The experiment should be so conducted as to avoid all unnecessary physical and mental suffering and injury. No experiment should be conducted where there is a prior reason to believe that death or disabling injury will occur. The degree of risk to be taken should never exceed that determined by the humanitarian Importance of the problem to be solved by the experiment. Proper preparations should be made and adequate facilities provided to protect the experimental subject against even remote possibilities of injury, disability or death. The experiment should be conducted only by scientifically qualified persons. The highest degree of skill and care should be required through all stages of the experiment of those who conduct or engage in the experiment. In order to be in full compliance with the Department of the Army regulations and policies, scientists were involved in a great deal of painstaking research long before volunteers were used. The preliminary work often took years.

  There were several ways that chemical compounds came to the attention of the Medical Research Laboratories. Some of those were: discovery by Medical Laboratory employees through basic research or during experiments with other chemicals; review of professional literature; accidental or intentional discovery by industry; and recommendations from other medical research institutions (both in the US and other countries). However, the most prevalent source of chemical compounds appeared to be from the Chemical Corps Industrial Liaison Program. An example of this method was the discovery of benzilates (BZ), the most useful of the known incapacitating agents developed by the Chemical Corps. It was reported that as of October 1960 that the most potent benzilate candidate agent under consideration by the Chemical Corps was agent EA 2277. Chemical Corps screened this compound, along with thousands of others recived from their various sources, to determine its potential military usefullnes. Once the compounds with military value were selected from the mass of candidate agents, more detailed studies begin. These studies were known as "initial toxicity screening." Between 1950-1975 approximately 34,500 compounds were studied. Following initial screening, each compound was reviewed in light of its potential military value. Records reflected that 2,077 agents survived the initial review. Those agents selected for further chemical analysis were divided into three general categories: proposed irritants; incapacitants (such as LSD, PCP); and lethal agents.

  The proposed incapacitating agents were next studied in animal behavior tests, using several different species (still in the chemical laboratories). Next, the candidate agents were presented to the Medical Research Laboratories for adaptational research. Initial medical research included an evaluation of the data available from the Chemical Laboratory, evidence from industry, private institutions, and technical literature. Additionally, the laboratory staff conducted pathology and pharmacology studies. Following these evaluations, a second major review was conducted to further reduce the number of candidate compounds. Records reflected that 2,026 of the available 2,077 agents were rejected at this stage of the research cycle. The remaining 51 candidate agents were submitted for pre-clinical testing at the Medical Research Laboratories. The next laboratory studies involved research in numerous animal species, prophylaxis studies, and therapy studies. Only 32 candidate agents reportedly survived the pre-clinical research phase of the cycle. Those agents were selected for clinical testing with volunteers. Once the agent passed the pre-clinical or animal testing phase it was considered safe for human experiments.

  A request to conduct experiments with nerve gases on volunteers was submitted in August 1953. Permission was granted in November 1953, however, it did not provide for a source of volunteer subjects. On 12 March 1954 The Surgeon General prepared a set of principles, policies, and rules for the use of human volunteers in medical research. With four exceptions, these principles generally were the same as those published in Chief of Staff memorandum 385. The first rule was in the form of expanded guidance regarding volunteer consent. Next, rules 7 and 8 of the Chief of Staff memorandum 358 guidance were expanded as follows: "Adequate preparations should be made and adequate facilities provided to protect the experimental subject against even remote possibilities of injury, disability or death. This included hospitalization and medical treatment as may be required. The experiment should be conducted only by scientifically qualified persons (including an adequately trained physician) who shall be required to exercise the highest degree of skill and care throughout the experiment. Competent consultants should be available on short notice in this connection." Finally, there was included an additional rule: "Agents used in research must have the following limiting characteristics: controllable lethality; no serious chronicity anticipated; effective therapy available; and adequate background or animal experimentations." These were not intended to replace the rules set forth in the basic policy, but rather to clarify their intent. This program reportedly visualized four types of studies for human volunteers. "The first category consists of planned, hazardous experiments where there is a clear-cut risk, but with intelligent, adequate supervision, safeguards, and adequate therapy available, it is felt that no irrevocable damage will be done. Experiments will not be attempted where such damage can be foreseen. These form the type of experiments for which the Army Secretary's approval has been received and the only kind where such approval is required. Another category includes risk of accidental exposure to hazardous degree. The fullest possible studies should be made of any such unplanned exposures. The third category consists of experiments that are only potentially but not definitely hazardous. These experiments would be hazardous if the individual, despite previous examinations and check-up, should prove unusually senstitive, or if there occurs an accidental error or break in technique. The fourth category of procedures will be those designated non-hazardous, experiments involving no hazard greater than that of crossing a highway."
  
  Pennsylvania’s Holmesburg prison. An investigation found that Dr. Albert Kligman complied with DoD policy on human volunteers that required, among other things, consent. It was also the only experiment conducted on inmates.<sup>[[12]](https://archive.org/details/army-igchem)</sup></sup> Another review found, "It appears that all of the test subjects were volunteers and that stringent medical safeguards and followup procedures were used."<sup>[[13]](https://www.esd.whs.mil/Portals/54/Documents/FOID/Reading%20Room/NCB/02-A-0846_RELEASE.pdf#page=5)</sup></sup>

  Evidence that more than 7,000 volunteers were tested at Edgewood Arsenal without a single fatality or serious injury must be accepted as supporting evidence of the ability of the US Army and the medical research staff to fulfill their responsibilities.<sup>[[14]](https://archive.org/details/army-igchem)</sup></sup> In the spring of 1980, the Department of the Army asked the Committee on Toxicology of the National Research Council's Board on Toxicology and Environmental Health Hazards to study the possible chronic or delayed adverse health effects incurred by servicemen who had been exposed experimentally to various chemicals at the U.S. Army Laboratories, Aberdeen Proving Ground, Edgewood, Maryland, during 1955-1975. Institute of Medicine (IOM) published a three-volume study, which found no adverse health effects from those subjects.<sup>[[15]](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK222994/)</sup></sup> Project SHAD was under Project 112. They ran both chemical and biological tests. To date, there is no clear evidence of specific, long-term health problems associated with participation in Project SHAD. The Health and Medicine Division (formally known as the Institute of Medicine) of the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine conducted a study sponsored by VA and presented findings in the 2007 report Long-Term Health Effects of Participation in Project SHAD (Shipboard Hazard and Defense). The same conclusions were found in a 2016 Report, Assessing Health Outcomes Among Veterans of Project SHAD (Shipboard Hazard and Defense).<sup>[[16]](https://www.nap.edu/catalog/11900/long-term-health-effects-of-participation-in-project-shad-shipboard-hazard-and-defense)</sup></sup> <sup>[[17]](https://www.nap.edu/catalog/21846/assessing-health-outcomes-among-veterans-of-project-shad-shipboard-hazard-and-defense)</sup></sup> <sup>[[18]](https://www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures/shad/index.asp)</sup></sup> <sup>[[19]](https://www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures/edgewood-aberdeen/index.asp)</sup></sup> <sup>[[20]](https://www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures/shad/index.asp)</sup></sup> <sup>[[21]](https://health.mil/Military-Health-Topics/Health-Readiness/Environmental-Exposures/Chemical-and-Biological-Exposures)</sup></sup>
  
- Among the first chemicals used as lethal/tactical weapons during World War I (WW I) were vesicants or blistering agents. The most widely used agents were the mustards, also known as mustard gas. Fearful that mustard gas might be used again in WW II, the U.S. military conducted experiments at the beginning of the war to test the effectiveness of various protective clothing and equipment in preventing injury/incapacitation due to mustard gas exposure (2). One method of testing involved exposing Navy volunteers wearing protective clothing and gas masks to mustard gas in a sealed chamber that was 10′ by 15′ with a 12′ high ceiling. The interiors of the chambers were most often maintained at 90°F and 65% relative humidity to test the durability of protective clothing under tropical conditions. Chamber test participants were often ask to perform routine duties, (e.g., marching), to determine the degree they had been incapacitated by their exposure to mustard gas. 
  
  A study published in 2000, at the recommendation of NRC, found, "To date there have been no studies examining possible long-term adverse health effects among test participants who received low level non-lethal exposures of mustard gas. We conducted a mortality follow-up study comparing the cause specific mortality of exposed veterans (i.e., veterans who participated in chamber tests) to that of controls (i.e., veterans who served during the same time period but who had no evidence of mustard gas exposure). All veterans in this study were white males. This study assessed the risk of cause-specific mortality associated with mustard gas exposure among Navy chamber test participants. Assessing the relative risk of cause specific mortality, namely respiratory diseases and respiratory cancers, there was no increased risk of any cause of death associated with mustard gas exposure. There was also no increased risk in cause specific mortality associate with level of mustard gas exposure among exposed veterans."<sup>[[22]](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1047279700000600)</sup></sup>

##### Radiation
- After WW2, the United States DoD conducted experiments with radiation on human subjects. An independent review that examined studies and policy from 1944 to 1994 found: Fully informed consent was an essential requirement for human subjects, as well as adequate medical treatment and strict ethics guidance adhered to. For example, conspiracy theorists have claimed that the DoD and University of Cincinnati conducted unethical experiments "on more than 90 poor, black, advanced stage cancer patients with inoperable tumors" and that Dr. Eugene Saenger "forged consent forms, and did not inform the patients of the risks of irradiation." However, this couldn't be further from the truth. The research at the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine (UCCM) examined the effectiveness of using new, deep-penetrating TBI technology to improve the treatment of patients with advanced cancer. During the 1950s and 1960s, the DoD sought information on the biological and clinical features of radiation injury. The DoD funded laboratory studies and psychological tests of cancer patients after they had received TBI and PBI as treatment for their disease. The DoD’s initial objective was to obtain a biological marker of radiation exposure. After 1965, the DoD was also interested in obtaining data on the psychological response to radiation exposure. A total of 88 patients from Cincinnati General Hospital participated in this project. Patient selection criteria required that only individuals with proven metastatic or far-advanced cancer be selected for the studies. In addition, subjects had to be in relatively good nutritional status and, in most cases, have normal hematologic values. These criteria remained relatively constant throughout the twelve years of the study. UCCM researchers also sought patients who had not undergone previous radiation or chemotherapy, had normal kidney function and new, abnormal tissue growth that was not radiosensitive, and were without lymphoma or bronchogenic cancer. According to a 1972 University of Cincinnati review of the project, the demographic distribution of study participants reflected the patient population of the Cincinnati General Hospital.
  
  UCCM researchers determined that TBI and PBI therapies were effective in controlling certain advanced cancers. They reported that the relief effects of radiation treatments compared favorably with results using anticancer drugs or chemotherapy. Delivery of higher radiation doses caused patients to experience blood problems, which included loss of red and white blood cells and platelets. Doctors infused bone marrow early in the post-irradiation period, hoping to prevent these problems. In May 1963, researchers in this project proposed establishing facilities for the withdrawal, storage, and reinfusion of bone marrow. By April 1966, a filtration system for the reinfusion of human bone marrow was completed, and by April 1969, success in bone marrow reinfusion was achieved. The use of this process immediately after radiation therapy minimized the characteristic bone marrow depression associated with higher doses of radiation. The degree of illness following reinfusion was significantly decreased and hospitalization greatly shortened. 
  
  Psychological studies of the patients in the UCCM project began in 1965. The DoD’s objective was to determine the effect of radiation exposure on emotional and intellectual functioning. The tests were designed to take into account the many complex variables that may influence the measurement of these functions after radiation treatment. The tests included the Reitan Trials Test, Cattell’s 16 Personality Factor Test, Wechsler Depression Rating Scale, Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale, and the five-minute verbal content test of Gottschalk and Gleser. The researchers found evidence of a decrease in intellectual functioning immediately after radiation. This effect was temporary, and functioning improved markedly within three days.

  In January 1972, the American College of Radiology (ACR) reviewed the science, methodology, and design of the project from a medical point of view to determine if the project conformed to then-contemporary standards for clinical investigations. The ACR report concluded that the UCCM project was validly conceived, stated, executed, controlled, and followed up; the process of patient selection conformed with sound medical practice; and procedures for obtaining patient consent were valid, thorough, and consistent with National Institutes of Health recommendations and the practices of most cancer centers. Also in November 1971, Clifford Grulee, M.D., Dean of the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, appointed an Ad Hoc Committee made up of members of the UCCM faculty to review the project. Dr. Grulee asked the committee to review the project’s scientific content, methodology, and data treatment. The committee’s report, released in January 1972, indicated that there were no problems with the project’s scientific content or methodology. In addition, the committee stated that there was no evidence that DASA funding was made contingent on work, ideas, or suggestions proposed by DASA and all information reported to DASA was kept unclassified and publicly available.<sup>[[23]](https://web.archive.org/web/20210821164345/https://archive.defense.gov/pubs/dodhre/Narratv.pdf)</sup></sup>
  
  From 1963 to 1973, a leading endocrinologist, Dr. Carl Heller, studied radiation's affects male reproductive function. ACHRE, "in its own analysis of the risks incurred by the Oregon and Washington testicular irradiation subjects based on a 600-rem dose, which was the maximum testicular exposure of any subject in either state. For purposes of this analysis we assumed that the testicles have average radiation sensitivity; that there is a linear relationship between cancer incidence and dose, and that there is a linear relationship between the risk of cancer and the amount of tissue exposed. Using these assumptions, we calculated that it would take more than double the dose received by any prisoner-subject to yield an effective dose of 1 rem. This means that the predicted increase over the expected cancer rate for the individuals who received the greatest exposure would be less that four-hundreths of 1 percent. For those who received smaller doses of radiation, the risk would, of course, be smaller, too.<sup>[[24]](https://ehss.energy.gov/ohre/roadmap/achre/chap9_2.html)</sup></sup>
  
- Some conspiracy theorists cite, what they believe as evidence, that the government covered-up evidence of the dangers posed to communities while conducting nuclear tests, in general—is a August 1980 subcommittee report on low-level radiation exposure. They quote the passage, "In addition, the government's program for monitoring the health effects of the tests was in-adequate and, more disturbingly all evidence suggesting that radiation was having harmful effects, be it on the sheep or the people, was not only disregarded but actually suppressed." However, a careful reading of this report shows that the only item they believe was "covered-up" and "suppressed" was a specific incident involving the deaths of sheep in Utah and Nevada. This incident only related to the Upshot-Knothole Test Series. A critical reading doesn't support the subcommittee's report. The matter was settled by a consensus in scientific literature, and also in Court, in 1956. The judge presiding over the case was A. Sherman Christensen. The government’s defense (backed by expert witnesses and unclassified records) maintained that fallout levels from the Upshot-Knothole Test Series were too low to cause the sheep deaths, and that the timing between the atomic tests and subsequent sheep deaths was purely a coincidence. Judge Christensen sided with the expert testimony provided by the AEC, stating that the government was negligent in not warning sheep owners of potential fallout in the area, but nothing more. A few years later, he overturned this ruling based on the aforementioned report. However, this ruling was in turn, over-ruled by a 3-Judge panel. "The trial court thus (1) mentioned the Bustad report and asserted that information had been withheld; (2) it mentioned that the Government had given misleading information as to radiation dosages; (3) that the veterinarians had been pressured by the Government; and (4) that misleading answers had been given to interrogatories by the Government. Each of these specifics have been considered in relation to the record in the proceedings appealed from and to what original record and briefs are extant. We must conclude that none of these several findings or conclusions are supported by the record. The information, data, reports, maps, experiments and witnesses were all available to plaintiffs at the first trial. The data is the same now. They tried their case on the basis of their then best judgment in the selection of witnesses, interviews, the evaluation of data and reports, and the consideration of the position of the experts.

  We have not mentioned the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory comparative study of radiation burns (in experiments) and the lesions on the Utah sheep. The analysis of tissues, organs, bones and blood samples made by Doctors Comar, Rust and Trum showed no evidence of radiation injury to the sheep in the flocks of plaintiffs where the losses took place. A tissue analysis was made on the sheep by the Utah University College of Medicine and the conclusion was reached that the sheep had been exposed to radiation but the examination concluded that there had been no acute effects from the exposure. The Hanford comparative study, as mentioned, concluded that the sheep had not died from exposure to radiation. In Bulloch I the conclusion of the experts was that the sheep and lambs had died as a result of unprecedented cold weather during the lambing and shearing, together with malnutrition, also to generally poor range conditions and to common diseases which caused the skin lesions and deaths. These conditions were established by the evidence. The losses began after an initial detonation but before the detonation of the "Harry" test. The expert witnesses who were the leading authorities on the subject thus concluded that the losses were not due to radiation. There was no evidence presented that humans in the areas with the sheep nor animals such as the sheep dogs or horses, which were with the sheep, were affected. This recent increase in the heat, the light, and awareness of atomic energy is all worthwhile, but we are unable to find in it any reason, as the plaintiffs apparently would have us do, to overturn the considered judgment of the court reached 25 years ago.<sup>[[25]](https://casetext.com/case/bulloch-v-united-states-2)</sup></sup> <sup>[[26]](https://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc1201913/)</sup></sup> <sup>[[27]](http://archive.gao.gov/t2pbat4/150521.pdf)</sup> <sup>[[28]](https://www.energy.gov/management/articles/fehner-and-gosling-atmospheric-nuclear-weapons-testing-1951-1963-battlefield)</sup></sup> A seperate lawsuit rested in 1988, where it was alleged that the Government failed in a duty to warn and provide information. A Federal appeals Court found this not so—while smacking down other claims. "In the instant case, no evidence was presented of any act or omission of the AEC or its employees that clearly contravened a specific statutory or regulatory duty, or that exceeded statutory or regulatory authority. There was no evidence, for example, that the Test Information Officer failed to release information he was required to give out, or that the Radsafe Officer failed to take a specific radiation measurement that had been decided upon."<sup>[[29]](https://casetext.com/case/allen-v-us-59?q=Allen%20v.%20U.S.,%20No.%2084-2126&sort=relevance&p=1&type=case)</sup></sup>
  
- In 1954, the US detonated a series of nuclear bombs to study their yield. This was part of Operation Castle and Operation Crossroads, near Bikini Atoll. Due to a miscalculation there was an increase in radiation output than expected. The US Department of Energy estimated that 253 inhabitants of the Marshall Islands were impacted by the radioactive fallout. It is alleged that the US deliberately used the Marshallese as "ginea pigs" for testing radiation under project 4.1. This allegation has been thoroughly investigated and is not supported by any evidence. Operation Castle had no biomedical program. US Military personnel were also exposed to large amounts of radiation, when they thought they were in safe areas of the expected yield.<sup>[[30]](https://www.osti.gov/opennet/servlets/purl/16380885-g1vuWf/16380885.pdf#page=212)</sup></sup> <sup>[[31]](https://www.osti.gov/opennet/servlets/purl/16061854-leUIeE/16061854.pdf#page=5)</sup></sup>

- Operation Plumbbob. Troops were not studied for radiation research, contrary to conspiracy theorists and historical revisionists.
Exercises Desert Rock VII and VIII, the test groups, and AFSWC each developed its own organization and procedures for ensuring the radiological safety of its members based on the established criteria of the AEC. The radiological safety plans were developed to minimize operational exposures to ionizing radiation. The safety of Desert Rock VII and VIII participants was the responsibility of the Desert Rock Exercise Director. A maximum radiation exposure limit of 5.0 Roentgens (R) in any 6-month period was established for Desert Rock troops. Of this exposure, no more than 2.0 R was to be from prompt radiation. Exposure limits for blast pressure and thermal radiation were also established. Based on exposure limits and mode of delivery, minimum distance criteria for positioning Desert Rock troops and observers were established. For a tower shot with a predicted maximum yield of about 10 kilotons, troops in the open were positioned at least 4,000 yards from ground zero. Troops in trenches at such a shot were positioned no closer than 2,600 yards from ground zero. Troops in armored vehicles were positioned no closer than 2,800 yards from ground zero. Radiation doses have been reconstructed for all of the major troop test units at the operation. These doses are in agreement with the available film badge dosimetry. About 40 DOD personnel received total doses exceeding 5 rem∗ during PLUMBBOB; half of these were accrued by cloud samplers or penetrators. The three largest doses were between 13 and 22 rem to Air Force fliers who penetrated the Shot JOHN cloud at about 10 minutes after burst. The other doses over 5 rem were scattered, mostly among Desert Rock VII and VIII support and technical service project personnel. Very few of the personnel in the major troop test described above received as much as 2 rem. The average total dose to DOD participants at PLUMBBOB was 0.4 rem. Animals were used for medical examination.<sup>[[32]](https://www.dtra.mil/Portals/125/Documents/NTPR/newDocs/14-PLUMBBOB%20-%202021.pdf)</sup></sup> <sup>[[33]](https://www.osti.gov/opennet/servlets/purl/16004390.pdf)</sup></sup> <sup>[[34]](https://www.dtra.mil/Portals/125/Documents/NTPR/newDocs/ANTHReport/1957_DNA_6005F.pdf)</sup></sup> <sup>[[35]](https://ia801305.us.archive.org/17/items/Misc-DoD/Analysis%20of%20Radiation%20Exposure%204th%20Marine%20Corps%20Provisional%20Atomic%20Exercise%20Brigade%2015%20June%201981.pdf)</sup></sup>

  As the ACHRE and DoD reviews found, "no documentation has been identified to indicate that human radiation experiments were part of the U.S. atmospheric nuclear weapons testing program. The Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments (ACHRE) concluded in 1995 that, 'although there was a real possibility that human subject research had been conducted in conjunction with the bomb tests, the tests were not themselves experiments involving human subjects.' Human aspects research conducted in conjunction with atomic weapons tests was designed to study the effects atomic weapons would have on combat operations. For example, flashblindness studies, troop training and maneuvers, psychological testing, and decontamination studies were designed with the goal of increasing the capabilities and preparedness of military forces to conduct effective military operations on a nuclear battlefield."<sup>[[36]](https://web.archive.org/web/20210821164345/https://archive.defense.gov/pubs/dodhre/Narratv.pdf)</sup></sup> Lastly, it should be noted that the Advisory Committee did find that "for the period 1944 to 1974 there is no evidence that any [US] government statement or policy on research involving human subjects contained a provision permitting a waiver of consent requirements for national security reasons".
  
- Green Run. ACHRE and the GAO found that, "Our work did not document that the test was intended to be a radiation warfare experiment or a field test of radiobiological effects on humans. In particular, we examined still-classified passages in the Green Run test report and found that they did not refer to any such intentions or operations."<sup>[[37]](http://archive.gao.gov/t2pbat4/150521.pdf)</sup></sup> <sup>[[38]](https://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/10111991)</sup></sup>  

#### CIA
##### MKULTRA
- There exists a rich universe of misleading allegations of MKULTRA, due to pop culture, historical revisionists and disinformation agents, about MKULTRA. Here are the raw facts:

  CIA has had a recurring interest in behavioral drugs. The subject is of general interest because of the operational applications that could be made against Agency employees by hostile forces, for which there would be a defensive requirement, as well as for possible use against foreigners to influence their behavior. The earliest record of this interest dates to the post-WWII period when there were indications of Soviet interest in the use of drugs for such purposes, the most famous example being the bizarre confessions of Cardinal Mindszenty in February 1949. In the past, CIA's interest has taken form in 4 programs: Bluebird/artichoke, mkdelta/search.

  BLUEBIRD/ARTICHOKE: In 1949 the Office of Scientific Intelligence (OSI) undertook the analysis of foreign work on certain unconventional warfare techniques, including behavioral drugs, with an initial objective of developing a capability to resist or offset the effect of behavioral drugs. There also was extensive review of foreign literature, particularly work in the Soviet Bloc. This program shortly became Project BLUEBIRD, with the objectives of (a) discovering means of conditioning personnel to prevent unauthorized extraction of information from them by known means, (b) investigating the possibility of obtaining control of an individual by application of special interrogation techniques, (c) memory enhancement, and (d) establishing defensive means for preventing hostile control of Agency personnel. In August 1951 Project bluebird was renamed Project artichoke which, in 1952, was transferred from OSI to the predecessor organization of the Office of Security. OSI did retain a responsibility for evaluation of foreign intelligence aspects of the matter and in 1953 made a proposal that experiments be made in testing LSD with Agency volunteers; OSI records indicate that no such experiments were made. OSI's involvement in this project was terminated in 1956. Meanwhile, the emphasis given artichoke in the predecessor organization to the Office of Security became that of use of materials such as sodium pentothal in connection with interrogation techniques and with the polygraph. During this period there was an informal Agency group known as the artichoke Committee, with representation from the Offices of Scientific Intelligence (OSI) and Medical Services (OMS), and the predecessor organizations of the Offices of Security and Technical Services (OTS). There are no records indicating the details of the exchanges in this committee, although there are references in fragmentary records of continued interest in LSD. The predecessor organization of the Office of Technical Service also was interested in behavioral drugs, although none of the office's records on this activity are in existence, having been destroyed in January 1973. As noted above it participated in the meetings of the so-called artichoke Committee. That office maintained liaison with personnel at Camp Dietrick, with whom meetings were held once or twice a year to discuss questions involving behavorial drugs. At one such meeting at Deep Creek Lake in Maryland, 18-19 November 1953, with seven representatives from Camp Dietrick and three from CIA, eight of those present were administered LSD which had been introduced into a bottle of Cointreau. 

  Although records of an inquiry by the Inspector General into the incident indicate that those present discussed testing on unwitting persons, and agreed in principle that such a program should be explored, none of them were advised until some 20 minutes after they drank the Cointreau that it had been treated with LSD. Of the two who did not take it, one did not drink alcoholic beverages at all and the other refrained because of a heart condition. One of the members of the group, a civilian employee of the Department of Army named Frank R. Olson, had serious after-effects. He was sent at CIA expense, with an escort from CIA, to New York where he received treatment from a psychiatrist, commencing 24 November. While in New York for this treatment he threw himself through a closed window in his room on the 10th floor of the Statler Hotel, falling to his death. CIA, in a document of 9 December 1953, signed by its General Counsel, certified that Dr. Olson's death resulted from "circumstances arising out of an experiment undertaken in the course of his official duties for the United States Government." This was the official position of the Agency, established for the purpose of assuring that the survivors of Dr. Olson received compensation from the BEC. Dr. Olson had experienced some instability and delusions prior to the incident, and it was judged that the drug served to trigger the act leading to his death. Official reprimands were issued by the DCI to three CIA employees held responsible for the incident.

  MKDELTA/SEARCH: On 29 October 1952 a formal policy was established by the Deputy Director of Plans (as then styled, now Deputy Director for Operations) for the use of biochemicals in clandestine operations (mkdelta). This was brought under a special funding procedure established on 3 April 1953 for special research purposes (mkultra). Among the materials studied were psylocbin and LSD. Following laboratory testing a second phase was begun which involved testing on voluntary participants. This research was conducted at well-known institutions under the control and direction of researchers at, and in conformance to the standards of, those institutions. The research and its results were generally unclassified and published in the normal manner by those researchers.  In only three instances was research performed in a manner which would raise questions regarding its ethical/moral propriety (the safehouse activities, with the Bureau of Narcotics as the lead) The questionable subprojects involved the use of individuals who were not aware that they were the subjects of a research program or that they were being given a drug. This unwitting testing generally took place in social situations among friends and acquaintances of the researcher.  In 1963, after questions were raised within the Agency by the Inspector General about the propriety of these subprojects, they were discontinued. 

  Responses to inquiries say, "One private researcher writes, with reference to prospective experiments with drugs, "I was told that I would have absolute discretion of refusal and that I would have final authority on experimental design and informed consent: All of this research was open and above board .. Never, never was I asked to do anything which violated medical ethics or the principles of informed consent with reference to the matters of unwitting administration of drugs, psychotropic or other, I can state categorically that no CIA person ever asked me to administer such drugs, wittingly or unwittingly. No such drugs were ever administered by me or under my direction. From the press, I have the impression that there has been an effort to caricature certain CIA individuals as pranksters. I would like to note that everything I have seen of professional CIA personnel has represented the top level of serious, dedicated, informed business ... The people who undertook this investigation were able scientists, and they selected advisors and researchers who seemed to be the individuals most able to contribute ... From a long experience with this project, I can say that I never saw a single case of experimental drug administration without informed consent."

  The president of one prominent university wrote: "If I had been at the time individually aware of such a research project and had been called. upon to pass judgment on it, I would have judged it by the merit of the particular project and not by which governmental agency was directly or indirectly sponsoring the research. As far as I am concerned the CIA is just as respectable as any other governmental agency or private foundation ... I wonder whether most of this concern about these research projects arises not out of any ethical considerations but out of hostility in certain circles toward anything done by CIA whether openly or covertly."

  In sum, if there was any unwitting drug testing sponsored directly by CIA, it seems to have been limited almost exclusively to the safehouse operations. Apart from the activities in the safe-houses we have found for the most part that CIA was interested in the results of research initiated and sponsored by other organizations and conducted in accordance with professional and ethical standards applicable to the circumstances at the time. We have found no evidence that CIA exerted undue influence or attempted in any way to coerce individuals or institutions to undertake research they might not otherwise have undertaken nor did the Agency attempt to cause any compromise of professional and ethical standards under which the research was conducted. Insofar as we are able to tell from our records, none of the research conducted by private institutions was clandestine in any way; studies were carried out openly and the results in many cases were published. As a matter of fact, it can even be reported that some significant contributions were made in the advancement of psychiatry, pharmacology, and medicine." Following the Inspector General's challenge of the program, there was a review of its nature and it was resubmitted for approval under the name of Project mksearch. Funding for mksearch commenced in FY-1966, running through 1972. There were various research activities carried on under it, but the only aspect related to behavioral drugs dealt with an inquiry in improvement by drugs of learning ability and memory retention; under this there is a record of testing on volunteers.

  Project OFTEN/CHICKWIT: In 1967 the Office of Research and Development (ORD) and the Edgewood Arsenal Research Laboratories undertook a program for doing research in influencing human behavior with drugs. A phased program was envisioned that would consist of acquisition of drugs and chemical compounds believed to have effects on the behavior of humans, and testing and evaluating these materials through laboratory procedures and toxicological studies. Compounds believed promising as a result of tests on animals were then to be evaluated clinically with human subjects at Edgewood. Substances of potential use would then be analyzed structurally as a basis for symthesizing new derivatives of greater utility. Samples of drugs and chemicals were obtained from drug and pharmaceutical companies, government agencies such as Edgewood, NIH, FDA and the Veterans Administration, as well as from research laboratories and individual researchers. Most of the materials came from the drug industry, consisting largely of substances that had been rejected because of undesired side effects from the point of view of medicinal use. Project often dealt with testing the behavioral and toxicological effects of drugs in animals and, ultimately, humans.Project chickwit was to acquire information on new drug developments in Europe and the Orient, and acquiring samples. One substance identified as a potential incapacitant was in an area known to be the subject of research by the Soviet Union, being considered a potential threat to U.S. leaders because of the ease with which it could be administered. Study of this material progressed to testing in 1971-1972 at Edgewood. This involved twenty volunteers. Records and evaluations held by CIA are limited, the program being terminated in January 1973 when final reports had not yet been prepared. Edgewood completed the follow-up testing required because of the prolonged after-effects, for which it billed CIA in April 1973, but did not provide CIA with the results. The work that continued after CIA's termination of the project was the completion of testing protocol, including interviews of subjects.<sup>[[39]](https://archive.org/details/cia-rdp-86-m-00886-r-000800010039-4)</sup></sup> <sup>[[40]](https://archive.org/details/cia-rd-and-testing-of-be-15132315)</sup></sup> <sup>[[41]](https://www.cia.gov/readingroom/docs/CIA-RDP83-00156R000300050028-0.pdf)</sup></sup> <sup>[[42]](https://www.cia.gov/readingroom/docs/CIA-RDP83-00156R000300050037-0.pdf)</sup></sup>
   
  Conspiracy theorists claim that the CIA conducted radiation experiments on humans, as part of mkultra. However, 3 independent reviews found this was not so. CIA's History Staff conducted the most authoritative investigation onto the matter and found that it had not. This independent finding was corroborated by ACHRE's independent examination, "No evidence was found among the public or classified records to contradict CIA's conclusion that it did not engage in human radiation experiments." And, "Although CIA was a member of the Interagency Working Group on Human Radiation Experiments and possessed documents suggesting CIA involvement with human radiation experimentation, the Advisory Committee has found no evidence to indicate that CIA actually conducted or sponsored such experiments."<sup>[[43]](http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2019/ph241/kumar1/docs/achre-oct95.pdf#page=660)</sup></sup> <sup>[[44]](http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2019/ph241/kumar1/docs/achre-oct95.pdf#page=680)</sup></sup> <sup>[[45]](https://inis.iaea.org/collection/NCLCollectionStore/_Public/27/031/27031227.pdf#page=56)</sup></sup> <sup>[[46]](https://archive.org/details/csi-radiation-review)</sup></sup> <sup>[[47]](https://sgp.fas.org/library/humexp/appb.htm)</sup></sup> Further, no, the US Government didn't invent LSD. It's a surprise, but people do believe this. No, it was discovered by Albert Hofmann, a Swiss chemist, in 1938.<sup>[[48]](https://archive.org/details/army-igchem)</sup></sup> 


##### Civilian

- At the request of New York City’s Administration for Children’s Services, beginning in 2005 the Vera Institute of Justice undertook an in-depth examination of issues related to the enrollment and monitoring of New York City foster children in clinical trials related to the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS). The request was prompted by allegations that African American and Latino children were inappropriately removed from their families and placed in foster care to facilitate their enrollment in dangerous and unnecessary medical experiments. Other concerns included whether children suffered unnecessarily as a result of their participation, whether children in trials were HIV infected, whether trial researchers properly obtained informed consent, and whether the child welfare system adequately monitored the children in their care. Vera reviewers found little or no evidence in the information examined for some of the concerns that prompted Children’s Services to initiate this study. Many children—inside and outside of foster care and clinical trials—died because of complications of HIV/AIDS during the late 1980s and 1990s. Eighty of the 532 children who participated in clinical trials or observational studies died while in foster care; 25 of them died while enrolled in a medication trial. Vera medical staff did not find, however, that any child’s death was caused directly by clinical trial medication. An examination of data from the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, though not conclusive, suggests that HIV-positive foster children who were enrolled in clinical trials and/or observational research studies did not experience an increased risk of death from their enrollment in clinical trials.

  The child welfare files contained information indicating that some children experienced serious toxicities, or side effects, from trial medications, such as reduced liver function or severe anemia. These toxicities were consistent with toxicities described in published articles about the trials. Vera reviewers found many instances where a physician made adjustments to a child’s treatment in light of these problems as required by the clinical trial protocol. Where documentation allowed reviewers to make a determination, children in foster care met age, HIV status, and disease stage criteria for inclusion in the specific trials in which they were enrolled as described in the trial protocol. Reviewers found that two of the 532 children met exclusion criteria for the medication trials in which they were enrolled. In 1988, when city officials first considered the participation of foster children in clinical trials, the child welfare agency conducted a lengthy review of state and federal research regulations. The social services commissioner and his staff were aware of concerns about the participation of African American and Latino children in medical research and they consulted with several medical experts, including the National Medical Association (an organization of African American physicians). The standard the agency developed for approving trials—that every child in foster care enrolled in a trial have the possibility of benefiting from that trial— exceeded that of federal regulations. The policy also required that researchers obtain informed consent from a birth parent when parental rights remained intact. Many files document medical researchers’ discussions of the risks and potential benefits of trial enrollment with a birth parent and the parent’s subsequent permission to enroll the child. In several cases, parents did not want their children in a clinical trial and the child did not participate in the trial. Children in foster care appeared to participate in trials at rates that suggest they were not specially targeted for enrollment into HIV/AIDS clinical trials. Foster children made up 30 percent of all New York City enrollments in 16 trials of medical interventions for which city- level data were available. Thirteen percent of these enrollments occurred prior to the child’s entry into foster care, with participation extending into the period they were in foster care.
  
  Children in foster care who participated in HIV/AIDS clinical trials were predominantly African American and Latino (64 percent African American and 30 percent Latino). This demographic profile paralleled the demographics of children with HIV infection in New York City (58 percent African American, 35 percent Latino). There was no evidence in the child welfare files of children being removed from their families by Children’s Services because a parent refused to consent to a child’s participation in a clinical trial. Vera reviewers found no evidence in the child welfare files, clinical trial protocols, or interviews that children, parents, foster parents, foster care agencies or staff, or child welfare agencies or staff received incentive payments for children to participate in clinical trials.<sup>[[49]](http://archive.gao.gov/t2pbat4/150521.pdf)</sup></sup>

- From 1945 through 1947 Manhattan Project researchers injected eighteen human subjects with plutonium, five human subjects with polonium, and six human subjects with uranium to obtain metabolic data related to the safety of those working on the production of nuclear weapons. All of these subjects were patients hospitalized at facilities affiliated with the Universities of Rochester (11 patients), California (3 patients), and Chicago (3 patients) or at Oak Ridge (1 patient). Another set of experiments took place between 1953 and 1957 at Massachusetts General Hospital, in which 11 patients with terminal conditions were injected with uranium. All were near death (in a coma or semicoma) prior to injection and were receiving usual hospital care for comatose patients. The subjects expired from their brain cancer within several months of injection. Study results indicated that 99 percent of the injected uranium cleared the blood within 20 hours. This wasn't a government program, so to speak. It was a collection of a few individuals at universities who coordinated on their own. How all the injections were coordinated—or even if they were coordinated—is unclear.<sup>[[50]](https://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/10111991)</sup></sup> 
 
  Further, ACHRE couldn't determine if those involved provided consent, due to obvious limitations. Some did consent, others may not have. As one officer said, "It is unlikely that these tests were made without the consent of the subjects." Which supports a claim made by one of the Chicago doctors in 1974 that some form of oral consent for the injections had been obtained. When the civilian AEC took over for the Manhattan District on January 1, 1947, the plutonium injections provoked a strong reaction at the highest levels. Concern for minimizing risk of harm to subjects is evident in several of the planning documents relating to the experiments, an obligation that many of those involved apparently took seriously. At Chicago, for example, where the highest doses of plutonium were used, care was taken to ensure that all the subjects had terminal illnesses.<sup>[[51]](http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2019/ph241/kumar1/docs/achre-oct95.pdf#page=255)</sup></sup> 
 
  A 1962 paper, openly published, said that, "During the early days of the Manhattan Project, the excretion and retention data on which to base a method of diagnosing Pu239 body burden were largely from experiments on rats. It seemed imperative, therefore, to determine retention and excretion in a limited number of terminal human patients. Sixteen cases were studied, the first beginning in April of 1945. Life expectancy of the individual and relative freedom from kidney disease were the principle criteria for case selection. As a rule, individuals were chosen who were past 45 yr of age and who were suffering from well-established disorders that made survival for 10 or more years highly improbable. Adherence to this rule avoided the possibility of development of late radiation effects from plutonium." The study notes that many such patients died within 30 days, due to their terminal illness. Only 3 lived the full 138-day observation period."<sup>[[52]](https://www.osti.gov/opennet/servlets/purl/16369158-b6Yb0H/16369158.pdf)</sup></sup>

- Historical revisionists have long-claimed that the US conducted unethical research on Children with radiation. However, a critical examination of the record reflects this is not so. Although in the 1940s and 1950s there were apparently no written rules of professional ethics for pediatric research in general, there were guidelines for the investigational use of radioisotopes in children. In 1949, the Subcommittee on Human Applications of the Atomic Energy Commission's Isotope Division established a set of rules to judge proposals submitted by researchers for the use of radioisotopes in medical experiments with human subjects, including "normal children."" These standards appeared in the fall 1949 supplement to the AEC's isotope catalogue and price list. These guidelines did not mention consent--of parents, guardians, or children. Instead, this statement simply discouraged nontherapeutic experiments with children. The guidelines did not, however, suggest that the practice was completely inappropriate; the subcommittee asserted that "important" research using "harmless" levels of radiation dosage with children was acceptable. The crucial terms important and harmless were left undefined. It seems reasonable to expect that "important" pediatric research would address a significant medical problem affecting children or would explore key aspects of normal human physiology-relevant to health promotion or disease Part II prevention— for which research on children is indispensable. By these standards, the twenty-one nontherapeutic radiation experiments with children whose risks we review in the next section of this chapter could all be said to address important questions relevant to pediatric health care. During the 1944-1974 period, there was an explosion of interest in the use of radioisotopes in clinical medicine and medical research, including pediatrics. The twenty-one research projects we review here include only a small number of all those that were likely conducted. These twenty-one do include, however, every nontherapeutic study that was funded by the federal government and fell into our original group of eighty-one pediatric radiation experiments.
  
  All 21 projects analyzed in detail involve the administration of radioisotopes to children in order to better understand child physiology or to develop better diagnostic tools for pediatric disease. In this respect, the studies supported by the federal government do not differ from those reviewed that had other funding sources. With the exception of the study at the Wrentham school to evaluate protective measures for fallout, none of the 21 experiments reviewed was related to national defense concerns. Seventeen of the twenty-one experiments involved the use of iodine 131 for the evaluation of thyroid function.<sup>[[53]](http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2019/ph241/kumar1/docs/achre-oct95.pdf#page=345)</sup></sup>
  
- A number of myths surround Walter E. Fernald State School, in which sensational allegations claimed residents who were mentally ill were subject to radiation experiments. However, an independent review found the opposite, "Of significant note is that no research was identified by the Task Force that involved testing the effect of radiation on human beings by introducing radioactive materials purposefully into their bodies to measure or monitor such effects. The nutritional research studies used small amounts of radioactive material as tracer elements to understand how the body functioned or obtained elements from the diet; the Thyroid studies used small to large amounts of tracer materials, also to learn about body functions; and, the so-called Cold War study at Wrentham differed in that the tracer materials were used to find the point at which administration of iodine blocked the uptake of radioactive materials that would be found in nuclear fallout."

  Further, it will be stated that many of the people who became residents of the Walter E. Fernald School, from its opening in 1848 right through the 1950s, were not admitted with a diagnosis of mental retardation. Societal and cultural norms of the day permitted persons to be admitted to state-operated institutions for a number of reasons. All were labeled mentally retarded just by virtue of having lived within the facility. The Task Force asks that the general public and members of the press take special note that these labels are grossly inaccurate, misleading, and simply not true.<sup>[[54]](https://ia902209.us.archive.org/31/items/reportonuseofrad00mass/reportonuseofrad00mass.pdf)</sup></sup> <sup>[[55]](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK222994/)</sup></sup>
  
- The Tuskegee experiment,1932. This has been subject to a lot of disinformation and popular myth. I'll quote at length from a 2005 Lancet Infectious Diseases article that corrects the distorted record on the episode<sup>[[56]](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(05)01286-7/fulltext)</sup></sup>: "More than a quarter of black Americans questioned in a recent survey believe that AIDS was produced in a laboratory, and 16% believe that it was created by the US government to control the black population. In attempting to explain why such mistaken notions are so widely held, Laura Bogart, lead author of the study, says: “Conspiracy beliefs stem from current and historical discrimination against blacks in our health-care system, including the Tuskegee syphilis study”. The Tuskegee study has become the archetype of unethical research and racism in medicine. However, by citing Tuskegee, is Bogart merely invoking one set of conspiracy beliefs to explain another? Between 1932 and 1972, the US Public Health Service (USPHS) studied 600 black men, 399 with untreated latent syphilis and 201 uninfected controls, living around Tuskegee, Macon County, Alabama. Although there was no study protocol, the purpose of the Tuskegee experiments seems to have been to observe patients with untreated latent syphilis to autopsy and verify the presence or absence of syphilitic destructive lesions. According to a detailed analysis of the Tuskegee study by Robert M White in Archives of Internal Medicine, USPHS officers believed that the study “should forever dispel the rather general belief that syphilis is a disease of small consequence to the negro”. Many aspects of the conduct of the Tuskegee study are beyond dispute. The men who took part were not told their diagnosis and were misled into believing they were receiving treatment, when in fact most were never adequately treated, even when penicillin became available. However, a pervasive myth that must be dispelled is that patients were deliberately infected with syphilis. The truth is that the infected men had had syphilis for several years at the time they were recruited. It is debatable whether the study was racist. All the patients and controls were black (as was 82% of the population of Macon County in 1930), but this was because the study has its origins in earlier work supported by the philanthropic Rosenwald Fund, with the motivation of promoting the welfare of African Americans. Although the Rosenwald Fund decided not to support the Tuskegee study of untreated syphilis, it was endorsed by the Tuskegee Institute—an entirely African-American organisation—and black health-care professionals were involved at all stages of the study. Indeed, as late as 1969, the Macon County Medical Society, consisting mostly of black doctors, agreed to assist the USPHS in continuing the study.

    To describe the Tuskegee study as unethical requires an element of what Richard A Shweder describes as “presentism” (ie, judging past actions on the basis of the standards of today). When the study began, the only treatment for syphilis was the poorly efficacious arsphenamine compounds, and there was no medical consensus on the usefulness of these drugs in latent syphilis. And debate over whether treatment of latent syphilis did more harm than good continued into the early 1950s, well into the era of penicillin availability. We should also bear in mind that in the 1930s there were no written standards for experimentation with human beings, and the paternalistic attitude that pervaded medical practice at the time meant that the norms for informing patients about their illness were very different from now. Therefore, it is hard to imagine that a hypothetical institutional review board of the 1930s would have judged the Tuskegee study unethical at its inception. However, principles for research with human beings were adopted by the American Medical Association in 1946, and by the 1950s programmes for penicillin treatment of syphilis were widespread across the USA. Thus, by its 20th anniversary the Tuskegee study had become unethical by the standards of the time—patients should have been informed of their diagnosis and given the option of treatment. To use the “Tuskegee effect” to explain the disengagement by many black Americans with the reality of AIDS is perhaps understandable, given the way the study has been popularly interpreted. However, focus-group research shows that the public is able to weigh current concerns against worries about the Tuskegee study. The Tuskegee experiment deserves re-examination, free of our contemporary prejudices, before it is again deployed as a symbol of conspiracy."<sup>[[57]](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/224795)</sup></sup> <sup>[[58]](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2568733/pdf/jnma00185-0122.pdf)</sup></sup> <sup>[[59]](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1043659608314196)</sup></sup>
